📖 Variable discovery proposal (#48)
killianmuldoon/cluster-api: docs/proposals/20220330-topology-mutation-hook.md

> 

Reviewer: nit: add yourself to authors

- **Inline patches**: are defined inline in a ClusterClass and implemented by the core CAPI controller.
- **External patches**: are patches generated by an external component.
- **Topology Mutation Hook**: is a hook defined in this proposal that allows users to plug in an external component that generates patches.
- **External patch extension**: is an external component that generates patches.
- **Inline variables**: are variables defined inline in a ClusterClass.

> - **External variables**: are varialbes defined by an external component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **External variables**: are variables defined by an external component.
```

- **Variable Discovery Hook**: is a hook defined in this proposal that allows an external component to supply variable definitions.

## Summary

> This proposal introduces the Topology Mutation Hook, which makes it possible to mutate objects of the Cluster topology by generating patches and associated variables externally. The patches and associated variables are applied to templates defined in a ClusterClass.

Reviewer: I'm not sure the wording is good. We don't generate variables and we don't apply them to templates defined in a ClusterClass.

Maybe we should leave it out of the summary?

Reviewer: Similar below in some cases

### ClusterClass author guide

> A ClusterClass author can use an External Patch Extension by referencing it in a ClusterClass and adding the corresponding variable definitions, or relying on variable definitions supplied by a Variable Discovery Hook.

Reviewer: I think this won't work anymore: "adding the corresponding variable definitions"

    ...
```

> If the External Patch Extension requires variable definitions, they have to be added to either to ClusterClass.spec.variables or defined and supplied using a Variable Discovery Hook. It is up to the External Patch Extension developer to document them including their OpenAPI schema.

Reviewer: Similar here "they have to be added to either to ClusterClass.spec.variables" won't work anymore (as we don't send them to the extension)

* External Patch Extension developers should ensure fast responses under all circumstances.
* Cluster operators can set a timeout on the RuntimeExtensionConfiguration to ensure Cluster topology reconciliation for all Clusters is not slowed down by one slow External Patch Extension. This only helps if the slow External Patch Extension is not used for all Clusters.

#### Clashing external variable definitions

> Variable definitions supplied externally by an External Patch Extension though a Variable Discovery Hook can change when the definition in the External Patch Extension change. This can lead to a clash where variables that previously had the same name and definition no longer have the same definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Variable definitions supplied externally by an External Patch Extension through a Variable Discovery Hook can change when the definition in the External Patch Extension changes. This can lead to a clash where variables that previously had the same name and definition no longer have the same definition.
```

Mitigations:
* Variable Discovery Hooks allow addressing variables using namespacing, where the variable name is prefixed by the name of the External Patch Extension. 

> TODO: What are the user mitigations here?

Reviewer: Depending on who is the user. I think:
* patch extension authors have to clearly document their variables
* ClusterClass authors have to test their ClusterClass for clashes
* Both together could collaborate to ensure consistency of variable definitions across the entire ClusterClass

* External Patch Extension developers should ensure fast responses under all circumstances.
* Cluster operators can set a timeout on the RuntimeExtensionConfiguration to ensure Cluster topology reconciliation for all Clusters is not slowed down by one slow External Patch Extension. This only helps if the slow External Patch Extension is not used for all Clusters.

#### Clashing external variable definitions
Variable definitions supplied externally by an External Patch Extension though a Variable Discovery Hook can change when the definition in the External Patch Extension changes. This can lead to a clash where variables that previously had the same name and definition no longer have the same definition.

Mitigations:

> * Variable Discovery Hooks allow addressing variables using namespacing, where the variable name is prefixed by the name of the External Patch Extension. 

Reviewer: Q: are we suggesting another layer of namespacing in the variable name?
(might just be confusing for folks if we call both namespacing)

Author: No - this is out of date.
